<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></h3>
				<h4>THE ROAD TO PORTISHEAD</h4>
				<h5>I</h5>
				<p>It was not until Bath had very obviously been left behind that Yvonne de Kernogan⁠—Lady Anthony Dewhurst⁠—realised that she had been trapped.</p>
				<p>During the first half-hour of the journey her father had lain back against the cushions of the carriage with eyes closed, his face pale and wan as if with great suffering. Yvonne, her mind a prey to the gravest anxiety, sat beside him, holding his limp cold hand in hers. Once or twice she ventured on a timid question as to his health and he invariably murmured a feeble assurance that he felt well, only very tired and disinclined to talk. Anon she suggested⁠—diffidently, for she did not mean to disturb him⁠—that the driver did not appear to know his way into Bath, he had turned into a side road which she felt sure was not the right one. M. le duc then roused himself for a moment from his lethargy. He leaned forward and gazed out of the window.</p>
				<p>“The man is quite right, Yvonne,” he said quietly, “he knows his way. He brought me along this road yesterday. He gets into Bath by a slight détour but it is pleasanter driving.”</p>
				<p>This reply satisfied her. She was a stranger in the land, and knew little or nothing of the environs of Bath. True, last Monday morning after the ceremony of her marriage she had driven out to Combwich, but dawn was only just breaking then, and she had lain for the most part⁠—wearied and happy⁠—in her young husband’s arms. She had taken scant note of roads and signposts.</p>
				<p>A few minutes later the coach came to a halt and Yvonne, looking through the window, saw a man who was muffled up to the chin and enveloped in a huge travelling cape, mount swiftly up beside the driver.</p>
				<p>“Who is that man?” she queried sharply.</p>
				<p>“Some friend of the coachman’s, no doubt,” murmured her father in reply, “to whom he is giving a lift as far as Bath.”</p>
				<p>The barouche had moved on again.</p>
				<p>Yvonne could not have told you why, but at her father’s last words she had felt a sudden cold grip at her heart⁠—the first since she started. It was neither fear nor yet suspicion, but a chill seemed to go right through her. She gazed anxiously through the window, and then looked at her father with eyes that challenged and that doubted. But M. le duc would not meet her gaze. He had once more closed his eyes and sat quite still, pale and haggard, like a man who is suffering acutely.</p>
				<h5>II</h5>
				<p>“Father we are going back to Bath, are we not?”</p>
				<p>The query came out trenchant and hard from her throat which now felt hoarse and choked. Her whole being was suddenly pervaded by a vast and nameless fear. Time had gone on, and there was no sign in the distance of the great city. M. de Kernogan made no reply, but he opened his eyes and a curious glance shot from them at the terror-stricken face of his daughter.</p>
				<p>Then she knew⁠—knew that she had been tricked and trapped⁠—that her father had played a hideous and complicated rôle of hypocrisy and duplicity in order to take her away from the husband whom she idolised.</p>
				<p>Fear and her love for the man of her choice gave her initiative and strength. Before M. de Kernogan could realise what she was doing, before he could make a movement to stop her, she had seized the handle of the carriage door, wrenched the door open and jumped out into the road. She fell on her face in the mud, but the next moment she picked herself up again and started to run⁠—down the road which the carriage had just traversed, on and on as fast as she could go. She ran on blindly, unreasoningly, impelled by a purely physical instinct to escape, not thinking how childish, how futile such an attempt was bound to be.</p>
				<p>Already after the first few minutes of this swift career over the muddy road, she heard quick, heavy footsteps behind her. Her father could not run like that⁠—the coachman could not have thus left his horses⁠—but still she could hear those footsteps at a run⁠—a quicker run than hers⁠—and they were gaining on her⁠—every minute, every second. The next, she felt two powerful arms suddenly seizing her by the shoulders. She stumbled and would once more have fallen, but for those same strong arms which held her close.</p>
				<p>“Let me go! Let me go!” she cried, panting.</p>
				<p>But she was held and could no longer move. She looked up into the face of Martin-Roget, who without any hesitation or compunction lifted her up as if she had been a bale of light goods and carried her back toward the coach. She had forgotten the man who had been picked up on the road awhile ago, and had been sitting beside the coachman since.</p>
				<p>He deposited her in the barouche beside her father, then quietly closed the door and once more mounted to his seat on the box. The carriage moved on again. M. de Kernogan was no longer lethargic, he looked down on his daughter’s inert form beside him, and not one look of tenderness or compassion softened the hard callousness of his face.</p>
				<p>“Any resistance, my child,” he said coldly, “will as you see be useless as well as undignified. I deplore this necessary violence, but I should be forced once more to requisition M. Martin-Roget’s help if you attempted such foolish tricks again. When you are a little more calm, we will talk openly together.”</p>
				<p>For the moment she was lying back against the cushions of the carriage; her nerves having momentarily given way before this appalling catastrophe which had overtaken her and the hideous outrage to which she was being subjected by her own father. She was sobbing convulsively. But in the face of his abominable callousness, she made a great effort to regain her self-control. Her pride, her dignity came to the rescue. She had had time in those few seconds to realise that she was indeed more helpless than any bird in a fowler’s net, and that only absolute calm and presence of mind could possibly save her now.</p>
				<p>If indeed there was the slightest hope of salvation.</p>
				<p>She drew herself up and resolutely dried her eyes and readjusted her hair and her hood and mantle.</p>
				<p>“We can talk openly at once, sir,” she said coldly. “I am ready to hear what explanation you can offer for this monstrous outrage.”</p>
				<p>“I owe you no explanation, my child,” he retorted calmly. “Presently when you are restored to your own sense of dignity and of self-respect you will remember that a lady of the house of Kernogan does not elope in the night with a stranger and a heretic like some kitchen-wench. Having so far forgotten herself my daughter must, alas! take the consequences, which I deplore, of her own sins and lack of honour.”</p>
				<p>“And no doubt, father,” she retorted, stung to the quick by his insults, “that you too will anon be restored to your own sense of self-respect and remember that hitherto no gentleman of the house of Kernogan has acted the part of a liar and of a hypocrite!”</p>
				<p>“Silence!” he commanded sternly.</p>
				<p>“Yes!” she reiterated wildly, “it was the rôle of a liar and of a hypocrite that you played from the moment when you sat down to pen that letter full of protestations of affection and forgiveness, until like a veritable Judas you betrayed your own daughter with a kiss. Shame on you, father!” she cried. “Shame!”</p>
				<p>“Enough!” he said, as he seized her wrist so roughly that the cry of pain which involuntarily escaped her effectually checked the words in her mouth. “You are mad, beside yourself, a thoughtless, senseless creature whom I shall have to coerce more effectually if you do not cease your ravings. Do not force me to have recourse once again to M. Martin-Roget’s assistance to keep your undignified outburst in check.”</p>
				<p>The name of the man whom she had learned to hate and fear more than any other human being in the world was sufficient to restore to her that measure of self-control which had again threatened to leave her.</p>
				<p>“Enough indeed,” she said more calmly; “the brain that could devise and carry out such infamy in cold blood is not like to be influenced by a defenceless woman’s tears. Will you at least tell me whither you are taking me?”</p>
				<p>“We go to a place on the coast now,” he replied coldly, “the outlandish name of which has escaped me. There we embark for Holland, from whence we shall join their Royal Highnesses at Coblentz. It is at Coblentz that your marriage with M. Martin-Roget will take place, and.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Stay, father,” she broke in, speaking quite as calmly as he did, “ere you go any further. Understand me clearly, for I mean every word that I say. In the sight of God⁠—if not in that of the laws of France⁠—I am the wife of Lord Anthony Dewhurst. By everything that I hold most sacred and most dear I swear to you that I will never become Martin-Roget’s wife. I would die first,” she added with burning but resolutely suppressed passion.</p>
				<p>He shrugged his shoulders.</p>
				<p>“Pshaw, my child,” he said quietly, “many a time since the world began have women registered such solemn and sacred vows, only to break them when force of circumstance and their own good sense made them ashamed of their own folly.”</p>
				<p>“How little you know me, father,” was all that she said in reply.</p>
				<h5>III</h5>
				<p>Indeed, Yvonne de Kernogan⁠—Yvonne Dewhurst as she was now in sight of God and men⁠—had far too much innate dignity and self-respect to continue this discussion, seeing that in any case she was physically the weaker, and that she was absolutely helpless and defenceless in the hands of two men, one of whom⁠—her own father⁠—who should have been her protector, was leagued with her bitterest enemy against her.</p>
				<p>That Martin-Roget was her enemy⁠—aye and her father’s too⁠—she had absolutely no doubt. Some obscure yet keen instinct was working in her heart, urging her to mistrust him even more wholly than she had done before. Just now, when he laid ruthless hands on her and carried her, inert and half-swooning, back into the coach, and she lay with closed eyes, her very soul in revolt against this contact with him, against the feel of his arms around her, a vague memory surcharged with horror and with dread stirred within her brain: and over the vista of the past few years she looked back upon an evening in the autumn⁠—a rough night with the wind from the Atlantic blowing across the lowlands of Poitou and soughing in the willow trees that bordered the Loire⁠—she seemed to hear the tumultuous cries of enraged human creatures dominating the sound of the gale, she felt the crowd of evil-intentioned men around the closed carriage wherein she sat, calm and unafraid. Darkness then was all around her. She could not see. She could only hear and feel. And she heard the carriage door being wrenched open, and she felt the cold breath of the wind upon her cheek, and also the hot breath of a man in a passion of fury and of hate.</p>
				<p>She had seen nothing then, and mercifully semi-unconsciousness had dulled her aching senses, but even now her soul shrunk with horror at the vague remembrance of that ghostlike form⁠—the spirit of hate and of revenge⁠—of its rough arms encircling her shoulders, its fingers under her chin⁠—and then that awful, loathsome, contaminating kiss which she thought then would have smirched her for ever. It had taken all the pure, sweet kisses of a brave and loyal man whom she loved and revered, to make her forget that hideous, indelible stain: and in the arms of her dear milor she had forgotten that one terrible moment, when she had felt that the embrace of death must be more endurable than that of this unknown and hated man.</p>
				<p>It was the memory of that awful night which had come back to her as in a flash while she lay passive and broken in Martin-Roget’s arms. Of course for the moment she had no thought of connecting the rich banker from Brest, the enthusiastic royalist and <i>émigré</i>, with one of those turbulent, uneducated peasant lads who had attacked her carriage that night: all that she was conscious of was that she was outraged by his presence, just as she had been outraged then, and that the contact of his hands, of his arms, was absolutely unendurable.</p>
				<p>To fight against the physical power which held her a helpless prisoner in the hands of the enemy was sheer impossibility. She knew that, and was too proud to make feeble and futile efforts which could only end in defeat and further humiliation. She felt hideously wretched and lonely⁠—thoughts of her husband, who at this hour was still serenely unconscious of the terrible catastrophe which had befallen him, brought tears of acute misery to her eyes. What would he do when⁠—to-morrow, perhaps⁠—he realised that his bride had been stolen from him, that he had been fooled and duped as she had been too. What could he do when he knew?</p>
				<p>She tried to solace her own soul-agony by thinking of his influential friends who, of course, would help him as soon as they knew. There was that mysterious and potent friend of whom he spoke so little, who already had warned him of coming danger and urged on the secret marriage which should have proved a protection. There was Sir Percy Blakeney, of whom he spoke much, who was enormously rich, independent, the most intimate friend of the Regent himself. There was.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>But what was the use of clinging even for one instant to those feeble cords of Hope’s broken lyre? By the time her dear lord knew that she was gone, she would be on the high seas, far out of his reach.</p>
				<p>And she had not even the solace of tears⁠—heart-broken sobs rose in her throat, but she resolutely kept them back. Her father’s cold, impassive face, the callous glitter in his eyes told her that every tear would be in vain, her most earnest appeal an object for his sneers.</p>
				<h5>IV</h5>
				<p>As to how long the journey in the coach lasted after that Yvonne Dewhurst could not have said. It may have been a few hours, it may have been a cycle of years. She had been young⁠—a happy bride, a dutiful daughter⁠—when she left Combwich Hall. She was an old woman now, a supremely unhappy one, parted from the man she loved without hope of ever seeing him again in life, and feeling nothing but hatred and contempt for the father who had planned such infamy against her.</p>
				<p>She offered no resistance whatever to any of her father’s commands. After the first outburst of revolt and indignation she had not even spoken to him.</p>
				<p>There was a halt somewhere on the way, when in the low-raftered room of a posting-inn, she had to sit at table with the two men who had compassed her misery. She was thirsty, feverish and weak: she drank some milk in silence. She felt ill physically as well as mentally, and the constant effort not to break down had helped to shatter her nerves. As she had stepped out of the barouche without a word, so she stepped into it again when it stood outside, ready with a fresh relay of horses to take her further, still further, away from the cosy little nest where even now her young husband was waiting longingly for her return. The people of the inn⁠—a kindly-looking woman, a portly middle-aged man, one or two young ostlers and serving-maids were standing about in the yard when her father led her to the coach. For a moment the wild idea rushed to her mind to run to these people and demand their protection, to proclaim at the top of her voice the infamous act which was dragging her away from her husband and her home, and lead her a helpless prisoner to a fate that was infinitely worse than death. She even ran to the woman who looked so benevolent and so kind, she placed her small quivering hand on the other’s rough toil-worn one and in hurried, appealing words begged for her help and the shelter of a home till she could communicate with her husband.</p>
				<p>The woman listened with a look of kindly pity upon her homely face, she patted the small, trembling hand and stroked it gently, tears of compassion gathered in her eyes:</p>
				<p>“Yes, yes, my dear,” she said soothingly, speaking as she would to a sick woman or to a child, “I quite understand. I wouldna’ fret if I was you. I would jess go quietly with your pore father: ’e knows what’s best for you, that ’e do. You come ‘long wi’ me,” she added as she drew Yvonne’s hands through her arm, “I’ll see ye’re comfortable in the coach.”</p>
				<p>Yvonne, bewildered, could not at first understand either the woman’s sympathy or her obvious indifference to the pitiable tale, until⁠—Oh! the shame of it!⁠—she saw the two young serving-maids looking on her with equal pity expressed in their round eyes, and heard one of them whispering to the other:</p>
				<p>“Pore lady! so zad ain’t it? I’m that zorry for the pore father!”</p>
				<p>And the girl with a significant gesture indicated her own forehead and glanced knowingly at her companion. Yvonne felt a hot flush rise to the very roots of her hair. So her father and Martin-Roget had thought of everything, and had taken every precaution to cut the ground from under her feet. Wherever a halt was necessary, wherever the party might come in contact with the curious or the indifferent, it would be given out that the poor young lady was crazed, that she talked wildly, and had to be kept under restraint.</p>
				<p>Yvonne as she turned away from that last faint glimmer of hope, encountered Martin-Roget’s glance of triumph and saw the sneer which curled his full lips. Her father came up to her just then and took her over from the kindly hostess, with the ostentatious manner of one who has charge of a sick person, and must take every precaution for her welfare.</p>
				<p>“Another loss of dignity, my child,” he said to her in French, so that none but Martin-Roget could catch what he said. “I guessed that you would commit some indiscretion, you see, so M. Martin-Roget and myself warned all the people at the inn the moment we arrived. We told them that I was travelling with a sick daughter who had become crazed through the death of her lover, and believed herself⁠—like most crazed persons do⁠—to be persecuted and oppressed. You have seen the result. They pitied you. Even the serving-maids smiled. It would have been wiser to remain silent.”</p>
				<p>Whereupon he handed her into the barouche with loving care, a crowd of sympathetic onlookers gazing with obvious compassion on the poor crazed lady and her sorely tried father.</p>
				<p>After this episode Yvonne gave up the struggle.</p>
				<p>No one but God could help her, if He chose to perform a miracle.</p>
				<h5>V</h5>
				<p>The rest of the journey was accomplished in silence. Yvonne gazed, unseeing, through the carriage window as the barouche rattled on the cobble-stones of the streets of Bristol. She marvelled at the number of people who went gaily by along the streets, unheeding, unknowing that the greatest depths of misery to which any human being could sink had been probed by the unfortunate young girl who wide-eyed, mute and broken-hearted gazed out upon the busy world without.</p>
				<p>Portishead was reached just when the grey light of day turned to a gloomy twilight. Yvonne unresisting, insentient, went whither she was bidden to go. Better that, than to feel Martin-Roget’s coercive grip on her arm, or to hear her father’s curt words of command.</p>
				<p>She walked along the pier and anon stepped into a boat, hardly knowing what she was doing: the twilight was welcome to her, for it hid much from her view and her eyes⁠—hot with unshed tears⁠—ached for the restful gloom. She realised that the boat was being rowed along for some little way down the stream, that Frédérick, who had come she knew not how or whence, was in the boat too with some luggage which she recognised as being familiar: that another woman was there whom she did not know, but who appeared to look after her comforts, wrapped a shawl closer round her knees and drew the hood of her mantle closer round her neck. But it was all like an ugly dream: the voices of her father and of Martin-Roget, who were talking in monosyllables, the sound of the oars as they struck the water, or creaked in their rowlocks, came to her as from an ever-receding distance.</p>
				<p>A couple of hours later she came back to complete consciousness. She was in a narrow place, which at first appeared to her like a cupboard: the atmosphere was both cold and stuffy and reeked of tar and of oil. She was lying on a hard bed with her mantle and a shawl wrapped round her. It was very dark save where the feeble glimmer of a lamp threw a circle of light around. Above her head there was a constant and heavy tramping of feet, and the sound of incessant and varied creakings and groanings of wood, cordage and metal filled the night air with their weird and dismal sounds. A slow feeling of movement coupled with a gentle oscillation confirmed the unfortunate girl’s first waking impression that she was on board a ship. How she had got there she did not know. She must ultimately have fainted in the small boat and been carried aboard. She raised herself slightly on her elbow and peered round her into the dark corners of the cabin: opposite to her upon a bench, also wrapped up in shawl and mantle, lay the woman who had been in attendance on her in the boat.</p>
				<p>The woman’s heavy breathing indicated that she was fast asleep.</p>
				<p>Loneliness! Misery! Desolation encompassed the happy bride of yesterday. With a moan of exquisite soul-agony she fell back against the hard cushions, and for the first time this day a convulsive flow of tears eased the superacuteness of her misery.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
